MR. PRESIDENT: It's not
news to say that we're living
through challenging times.
The worst economic downturn
since the Great Depression.
A credit crisis that's made that
downturn worse.
And a fiscal disaster that has
accumulated over a period of years.
In the year 2000, we had
projected budget surpluses in
the trillions, and Washington
appeared to be on the road to fiscal stability.
Eight years later, and when I
walked in the door, the
projected budget deficit for
this year alone was 1.3 trillion.
And in order to jumpstart our
struggling economy, we were
forced to make investments that
added to that deficit through
the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act.
But as surely as our future
depends on building a new energy
economy, controlling health care
costs, and ensuring that our
kids are once again the best
educated in the world, it also
depends on restoring a sense of
responsibility and
accountability to our federal
budget.
Without significant change to
steer away from ever-expanding
deficits and debt, we are on an
unsustainable course.
So today, we simply can't afford
to perpetuate a system in
Washington where politicians and
bureaucrats make decisions
behind closed doors with little
accountability for the consequences.
Where billions are squandered on
programs that have outlived
their usefulness or exist solely
because of the power of the
lobbyist or interest group.
And where outdated technology
and information systems
undermine efficiency, threaten
our security, and fail to serve an engaged citizenry.
If we're going to rebuild our
economy on a solid foundation,
we need to change the way we do
business in Washington.
We need to restore the American
people's confidence in their
government, that it is on their
side, spending their money
wisely, to meet their family's
needs.
That starts with the painstaking
work of examining every program,
every entitlement, every dollar
of government spending, and
asking ourselves, is this
program really essential?
Are taxpayers getting their
money's worth?
Can we accomplish our goals more
efficiently, more effectively
some other way?
It's a process we've already
begun, scouring our budget line
by line for programs that don't
work so we can cut them to make
room for ones that do.
That means ending tax breaks for
companies shipping jobs overseas.
Stopping the fraud and abuse in
our Medicare program and
reforming our health care system
to cut costs for families and businesses.
It means strengthening
whistle-blower protections for
government employees who step
forward to report wasteful spending.
And it means reinstating the
pay-as-you-go rule that we
followed during the 1990s.
So if we want to spend, we need
to find somewhere else to cut.
And this Monday, in my first
full Cabinet meeting, I will ask
all my department and agency
heads for specific proposals for
cutting their budgets.
Already, members of my Cabinet
have begun to trim back
unnecessary expenditures.
Secretary Napolitano, for
example, is ending consulting
contracts to create new seals
and logos that have cost the
Department of Homeland Security
$3 million since 2003.
In the largest department,
Secretary Gates has launched a
historic project to reform
defense contracting procedures
and eliminate hundreds of
billions of dollars in wasteful
spending and cost overruns.
And I commend Senators McCain
and Levin, a Republican and a
Democrat, who have teamed up to
lead this effort in Congress.
Finally, in the coming weeks, I
will be announcing the
elimination of dozens of
government programs shown to be
wasteful or ineffective.
In this effort, there will be no
sacred cows and no pet projects.
All across America, families are
making hard choices, and it's
time their government did the
same.
And that's why I've assembled a
team of management, technology
and budget experts to guide us
in this work.
Leaders who will help us revamp
government operations from top
to bottom, and ensure that the
Federal Government is truly
working for the American people.
I've named Jeffrey Zients, a
leading CEO, management
consultant and entrepreneur, to
serve as Deputy Director for
Management of the Office of
Management and Budget, and as
the first ever Chief Performance
Officer.
Jeffrey will work to streamline
processes, cut costs, and find
best practices throughout our
government.
Aneesh Chopra, who is currently
the Secretary of Technology for
Governor Tim Kaine of Virginia,
has agreed to serve as America's
Chief Technology Officer.
In this role, Aneesh will
promote technological innovation
to help achieve our most urgent
priorities, from creating jobs
and reducing health care costs,
to keeping our nation secure.
Aneesh and Jeffrey will work
closely with our Chief
Information Officer, Vivek
Kundra, who is responsible for
setting technology policy across
the government, and using
technology to improve security,
ensure transparency and lower costs.
The goal is to give all
Americans a voice in their
government, and ensure that they
know exactly how we're spending
their money and can hold us
accountable for the results.
None of this will be easy. Big change never is.
But with the leadership of these
individuals, I am confident that
we can break our bad habits, put
an end to the mismanagement that
has plagued our government, and
start living within our means again.
That's how we will get our
deficits under control and move
from recovery to prosperity.
And that's how we will give the
American people the kind of
government they expect and
deserve.
One that's efficient,
accountable, and fully worthy of their trust.
Thank you.